For the last example of a greedy algorithm
in this course, we will look at a problem
communication theory, we will look at the
problem of Huffman Codes.
So, when we communicate, we have to transmit
information from one place to another place.
So, we might be working in some language like
English, Hindi or whatever, but if were using
computers for example, to transmit our data,
we know that they must send this information
in binary strings. So, our typical goal is
to take an alphabet, and then encoded it over
strings of 0 and 1, so that at the other end,
we can decoded and recover the message.
So, if you have say the 26 lower case letters
a to z, then it is easy to see that we need
to if you want to encode each letter as a
fixed sequence of 0Õs and 1Õs by fixed length,
then we will need to use 5 bits per letter,
because if you use only 4 bits, we can only
get 16 different combinations, with 5 bits
we can get 32 different combinations. So,
now a natural question is, can we do something
clever about using different length encoding
for different letters, so that more frequent
letters get send with shorter inputs. So,
can we optimize the amount of data we actually
transfer in order to send the message from
one place to another?
So, this brings us to the idea having a variable
length encoding, where we use different strings
of different length for different letters
in the alphabet. So, one of the most famous
examples of the variable length encoding is
the classical Morse code, which is developed
by Samuel Morse from the telegraph who is
invented. So, this was done using a mechanical
device by clicking on a contact and it will
produce long and short clicks. So, the short
clicks are called dots and the long clicks
called dashes, we can as well think of them
as representing the bits 0 and 1.
So, in the Morse code encoding, different
letters do have different encodings and in
English e is the most frequent letter and
t is another very frequent letter. So, Morse
assigned them codes of a dot, that is 0 for
e and a dash, that is 1 for t, then a Morse
took other frequent letters, such as a and
gave them two letter encodings. So, a is encoded
as dot dash, where 0 and 1.
Now, the problem with MorseÕs encoding is
that it is ambiguous, when you come to decoding.
So, for instance, if we look at the word,
the sequence 0 1, then we do not know whether
we should interpret each of these as a one
letter code and get e t e t, all for instance
we should think of this as 2 two letter of
codes and get a a and so on. So, depending
on whether we stop it is 0 or extends 0 to
0 1, we can get many different interpretations.
Now, in practice in Morse code, what we used
to happen is that the operator gives a slide
pause indicating the end of the letter. So,
therefore, effectively Morse code is not a
binary code, but it is a three letter code
0 1 and pause, now we are using of course,
digital computers, we do not want to go to
three letters. So, we want to efficiently
do these using just two letters.
So, in order to make a variable length code
an unambiguous decodable, we need what is
called a prefix quantity. When we read through
a sequence of 0Õs and 1Õs, we should be
unambiguously clear, whether we have read
a letter or there is more to read. We should
not be like the earlier case, where we have
read 0 and we do know, whether we stop at
0 and call it an e in the Morse code setting
or we want to call it an a which is 0 1.
So, we are going to use this capital letter
E to denote the encoding the function. So,
E of x is the encoding of the letter. So,
here is an example, so we have five letters
a, b, c, d, e and now, you can check that
none of these encodings can be extended to
anything. I do not have, if I see 1 1, it
must be an a. There is, no other code which
starts with 1 1. If I see 0 0 it is not a
code, but 0 0 1 is a code, so 0 1 cannot be
extend and so on. So, each of these cannot
be extended to be the code of any other letter.
So, now when we get along sequence like this,
there is no doubt, the first point when I
completed a letter is 0 0 1 and this is a
c.
The next point when I complete the letter
is three 0Õs and it is an e, then I read
another c and then an a and then a b. So,
if we have the prefix code property, that
is no letter is encoded to a string which
is the prefix of the encoding or some other
letter, then we have unambiguous decoding
possible and this is very important.
So, our goal is to find optimal prefix codes.
So, we need to talk about what we mean by
optimality. So, remember we said that our
goal is to assign shorter codes to more frequent
letters. So, somehow we have to determine,
what are more frequent and less frequent letters.
So, people have measure the frequency of the
occurrence of each letter and different languages,
so this is a very language specific thing.
So, this optimality is something which is
optimal for English, may not work of French
or any other Spanish or something. So, you
take a large body of text in a particular
language and you count the number of aÕs
bÕs cÕs dÕs and eÕs, and then you just
look at the fraction, out of the total number
of letters across all the steps, how many
are eÕs, how many bÕs, how many are cÕs.
So, this is a kind of statistical estimate
of the average frequency of this.
So, this frequency would be a fraction, what
fraction of the letter over a large body of
text will be eÕs, what fraction will be cÕs
and these fraction will add up to one, because
every letter would be one of them. So, the
fraction of a is plus, the fraction of b is
plus, fraction of c is and so on is going
to added to 1 and because of this, we can
also think of this statistical estimate or
a kind of probability.
Like, if I give you a random letter, if I
look at the piece of text and pickup a random
letter from the text, what is the probability
that x, well it is just be the frequency of
x across all the text f of x. So, these will
add up to 1.
So, now, we have a message, it consists of
some n symbols. So, we have M 1, M 2 up to
M n, so these are n symbols. Now, we know
that if I take a particular letter x, then
f x fraction of these are x, so in other words,
if I take n and I multiply by a fraction is
say, if I fix is say one third, then one third
of n. So, n by 3 of these symbols will actually
be the letter x and now, each of these Xs
is going to be represented by it is encoding.
So, supposing it is 0 1 0 then each x is going
to represent by 3 bits, so then n into f x
is the number of times I see x and this into
the length of this encoding is going to give
me the total number of bits taken to encode
all the xÕs in this message. Now, if I do
this for every letter, so if I take the summation
over every y or every x in my alphabet, n
times the frequency of the letter times the
encoding length of that letter.
So, this tells me how many bits I need to
encode that particular letter, add up all
the letters, I get the total length of the
encoded message. And if I do not include this
n, notice that n is not a part of the sum,
it is an independent thing, it is a fraction
of any n. If I just look at the total weighted
average of the lengths of the encodings, then
this is if you study probability theory, what
is called the expected length of the encoding.
So, this is the average number of bits, I
use for a letter.
So, let us work out how this, so suppose we
take our earlier example of 5 letters, now
we insert some fictitious information about
frequencies. So, this all these five values
are fraction between 0 and 1, they all add
to 1. Then if I do this summation over x of
f of x times the length of E of x, then I
have 0.32 times 2, because the encoding of
A is two letters, then I have 0.25 times to
2, because the encoding E is two letters and
so on.
So, I have these five terms a, b, c, d, e
and then I add it up and I get 2.25, so it
says that I need an average 2.25 bits per
letter. Of course, I do not use 2.25 bits
per letter, but what it says this for instance,
if I have a 100 letters, I would expect to
see 225 bits in the output encoding. Now,
a very specific kind of prefix code is the
fixed length code, where just by the fact
that every code to the fixed length, I know
exactly where each one is.
So, supposing I use 3 bits in this case, if
I want to fixed length code of this, then
there are five letters, I cannot do it with
2 bits, because I only get four different
combinations. So, I need 3 bits, if I use
some 3 bit code, then every 3 bits will be
one letter. So, in the fixed length encoding
in this, I will use 3 bits for letters, so
therefore clearly the number of bits per letter
is 3, because I am using 3 for every one of
them. And so by going to a variable length
code encoding which takes in to upon the frequency
and actually savings it is to a sending 300
bits for 100 character, it send into 225.
So, we have 25 percent saving, so this is
what we are trying to get at.
So, in this example in the previous thing
we have two frequencies 0.2 and 0.18, the
0.18 means d is less frequency than c, but
somehow we assigned c to be a longer code.
So, this violated our basic principle that
shorter code should be assigned to more frequent
letters. So, if you see a pair of letters
which are where one is more frequent than
other, I expected to get a shorter code and
I had not done so.
So, if I invert that, so supposing I now assign
a three letter code to d and a two letter
code to c, then these two terms change the
other terms, though the encoding may have
differ, the length do not change. So, then
I get instead of 2.25, I get on to 2.23, so
what this say is that looking at different
encodings I could get different A B L values,
this average bits per letter. So, now, our
goal is to find an assignment capital E which
minimizes this quantity. So, in our coding
the average efficient is possible.
So, to get to this, it is useful to think
of these encodings as binary trees, so in
a binary tree I can interpret directions as
0 and 1, so typically left is 0 and right
is 1. So, now, if I read of a path in a binary
tree, it is also a binary sequence. So, this
path is 1 1 1 on the right for example and
this path for example the 0 1 and this path
is 0 0 0. Now, if I read of a path and then
I find the letter of that label, then it is
as good as saying that path labels that letter
is encoded by that path.
So, here is because e is has the encoding
0 0 0 in the binary tree, I will follow the
path 0 0 0 and label that corresponding letter
that vertex by e. Now, because it is a prefix
code, if 0 0 0 labels e, they will not be
any code which says 0 0 0 and something more,
they will not be another label below it. So,
these labels will not extend to other label,
I will not find an f below d, because otherwise
it not a prefix code, I do 1 0 and I get a
t, but I do 1 0 something else, then I get
an f. So, the code for f extends the code
for d, this is not enough. So, in a prefix
code this cannot happen, so therefore, all
the labels are actually at leaf nodes, there
it nodes which have are more successors.
So, here is an encoding for the other scheme
that we had, where we exchanged the values
of c and d. So, now c has a two letter code
and d has a three letter code, this is indicated
by the in depth now, the depth this is path,
the length of the path is the depth of the
node. So, c in our earlier thing was a depth
3, and now it is a depth 2 and the d was depth
2 and now it is a depth 3. So, we want to
basically put thing which have higher frequencies,
higher up in the tree at lesser depth.
So, having encoded look at are encoding the
binary tree, we will now make a couple of
observation, three observation of bottom which
will be useful prove to develop an optimal
algorithm and prove it is optimal. So, the
first thing is that in such a tree, if it
is optimal, every node will either have no
children will be a leaf or it will have two
children. So, this is what we called a Full.
So, every optimal tree is full, now is easy
to see this, because the supposing the claim,
we other optimal tree in which somewhere in
between, we had a node which had only one
child. Then, this child can effectively will
be promoted, we can remove this node completely
and we can shrink the tree along this direction
a nothing will change, except that the depth
of the node is below become less. So, in fact,
we will possibly get a shorter average bit
length then we had, therefore by having a
Singleton, either only a left child or right
child, we cannot be optimal. So, the every
node must either 0 or two children.
The next property is exactly what we saw the
earlier thing, which is that, if I have two
nodes x and y, such that, x is higher than
y, so x is at some level and y is different
level. Then, x has a shorter encoding then
y, this must mean that f of x is at least
as much f of y, in other word, when I go down
the tree my frequency cannot increase, because
if f of y would bigger than f of x, that if
I had more ys than xs in my text. Then, I
will just exchange these two, I would find
a better encoding by putting y here and x
here.
Because, now if I do f of y time the length
of y and the depth y in this tree, then it
will reduce, because the depth of y is reduce
and this is the higher multiply. So, therefore,
if I had a higher thing below, then I could
exchange the letter and get better tree and
that does not happen in then optimal tree,
so then the optimal tree, if I go down the
tree, I only find lower frequency letters.
The final property is to do with leaves at
the lowest level, so supposing I have the
leaf at the lowest leaf, so this is some leaf
of a lowest level. So, I know because it is
an optimal tree, it cannot be a isolated child,
it must have a sibling so I go up and come
down, I must have a sibling. Now, there are
two possibilities, the two possibilities are
this is a leaf or the other possibility is
that, this is not a leaf, the claim if that
if it is not a leaf, then it must have children.
So, then there are leaves here which have
at the lower level, than x, but x is assumed
to be a maximum depth d. So, maximum depth
leaf cannot have sibling, which is not a leaf,
because its sibling it would have a children,
which have to higher depth. So, therefore,
if I have a maximum depth leaf in my optimal
tree, then it will occur as a pair with another
maximum depth leaf.
And so this is a conclusion in that leaves
of maximum depth occurred in pairs and then
we know that because frequencies keep of dropping
as we go down increasing in depth, these pairs
must have the lowest frequency, among the
lowest frequencies. So, in order to develop
the solution, we will use recursion, so what
we will do is, we will say, let us look in
the overall table that we start with and pick
two letters, which have the lowest frequency.
So, we can assign them the longest codes,
so they can be put at the lowest level and
then we know that the lowest level leaves
occur in pairs. So, let us assume that these
will be paired out, so we will assign these
lowest frequency letters x and y, to a pair
of leaves maximum depth, left and right does
not matter, because so the depth that matters.
So, now, the recursive a solution will say,
that how do a figure of what the rest of the
tree looks like, well if I have a situation,
where I have decided x and y go here. Then,
I will kind of treat, this is a unit and make
a new letter call x, y and give it the cumulative
frequency effects plus x, y of the old two
letter. So, construct the new alphabet in
which I drop x and y and I add a new composite
of hybrid letter x, y; whose frequency is
going to be f x plus f y.
Now, recursion kicks in, I have a k minus
1 letter alphabet, so I have recursively find
and optimal encoding of that. Now, before
coming to how to adapt the solution, the recursive
ends when have a only two letters, for two
letters, the optimal solution is to build
the tree which exactly two leaves, label 0
and 1 at the path. So, this is the base case,
if I have more than two letters I will recursively
construct tree to the smaller thing and then
I will come back and now, the tree that I
constructed I will have some where the leaf
label x y.
Now, x y is not a letter, so what I do is,
I will replace this, write new two leaves
called x and y. So, I will go from the tree
over a A prime to a tree over A by doings.
So, this is an algorithm called by develop
Huffman and this type of coding is call Huffman
coding.
So, let us look at this example that we had
earlier, so here the two lowest frequency
letters d and e. So, we merge them into the
new letter d, e and this is a frequency 0.23,
because it is 0.18 plus 0.05. Now, these two
are a two lowest letters, so we merge them
and we get a new letter c, d, e of cumulative
frequency 0.43, which is sum of all the frequencies
of the two values.
Now, it turns out that, these two are the
smaller two. So, I merge them into the letter
a, b and now, I have reached my base case
where have exactly two letters. So, I can
set of the trivial tree this two letters,
label 0 and 1. And now I work backwards, so
the last thing that I did was to merge a and
b, now I will take this a and b thing and
split it has a and b.
I will split a, b as a and b, I will get this
tree, then the previous step was to combine
c, d e into c and d, e. So, I am going to
the split this c and d, e.
And finally, I am going to split this up is
d and e. So, this is HuffmanÕs algorithm
and by recursively combining the two lowest
frequency nodes, and then taking the composite
node and splitting them back up to it is.
So, to show that this algorithm is the optimal,
we go by induction in the size in the algorithm.
Now, clearly when I have only two letters,
I cannot do any better than assign the one
of them 0 and one of them 1, so the base case
is optimal. So, we will assume that this optimal
for k minus 1 letters and now show that also
optimal for k letters.
So, recall that, we went to k minus 1 by combining
the two lowest frequency letters as 1, constructing
an optimal tree for the smaller alphabet and
then expanding the x, y to get a new. So,
the claim is when I go from the tree over
k minus 1 letters to the tree over k letters,
the cost is going to increase, but this cost
is going to be fixed by whichever letters
I choose to contract.
So, if I choose x and y to merge to go from
T to T prime, then the amount by the which
the average bits per letter is going to change
is exactly the frequency of this combine letter
f x y. So, the deterministically fixed by
which one I choose, then even though I do
know the cost of the trees directly, I can
tell you that the cost is going to be different
by this amount.
This is not very difficult to prove, so in
that summation that we had, from the tree
notation remember this depth of z is the same
as the length of the encoding of set, because
the depth exactly a reflects the length of
the string use to encoded. So, this is our
A B L calculation. Now, for every node other
than the x, y and x y, there are exactly at
the same position in T and T primes.
So, this these sum summation with terms do
not change, so the only changes are these
three nodes. So, what I will do, I will be
going to T prime to T is I will remove this
contribution of the composite letter xy. And
then at a next level which is 1 plus the depth
of the xy, I will add the node f x and I add
the node f x and I will get the components
x y, f x times that plus x y times, I am subtracting
this amount in the left, then I am adding
this amount to the right.
So, now, actually f of x y is nothing but
f x plus f y. So, this left hand side term
is actually this right hand side component
depth of x y, times of x plus y. So, I am
subtracting this and adding it back, so the
cancel each other, so therefore, all am left
with is one times f x plus y which is f x
by f y or f x y. So, therefore I am going
from T prime to T, the crucial thing is only
depend for which letters I have contract,
that fixes the difference uniquely.
Now, let us assume that, we know how to solve
all k minus 1 size alphabets efficiently and
we have done this recursive thing to construct
the tree for size k. Suppose, this is another
strategy would produce the better tree for
size k, so this another tree candidate tree
S produce by some different strategy, whose
is average bits for letter is strictly better
than the one that we construct recursive.
Now, in S, we know for sure that these two
letters that we use the in recursive construction
x and y. So, they occur somewhere at the bottom
of this tree. So, this is my tree S, these
must be leave nodes, because they have the
lowest frequency is over all the letters,
so must be a maximum depth, that they may
not be next to each other. But, it does not
matter, because since they are both at maximum
depth, I can move them around, this step,
I can move letters around, I can reassign
the two other leaf to a sender.
Such that, I come with the configuration I
come to new S, I call it S again, where actually
have x and y together. I can assume that the
S, that has this optimal property, which is
better in the T I constructed, actually as
x and y a sibling leaves other maximum depth.
Now, what I am going to do is this S, I am
going to concretely fuse this and get an S
prime.
So, this explain will be over k minus 1 letters
except instead of doing this by a recursive
call, I am actually taking a taking a concrete
tree over k letter and I am actually compressing
to two nodes into one and call in it to tree
over k minus 1 data set. But, because this
over k minus 1 letters and these are represent
the encoding, it cannot be any better than
the encoding that I recursively computed for
k minus 1 letters, because I am assumed by
induction by that algorithm those efficiently
for k minus 1 letters.
So, so S prime is no better than T prime,
but S prime plus f of x y is S, T prime plus
f of x y is T. So, the difference between
T prime and T and S prime S and exactly the
same. So, the S prime is a then T prime, then
S cannot any better than T. So, it was a contradiction
to assume that as S was strictly better than
T is this 2Õs that strategy of recursively
computing T is optimal for all k.
A word about the implementation, so what we
have to do is k minus 1 time, we have to merge
this two minimum values and compute the recursive
solution, bottle neck, is finding the minimum
values. If you use an array, then as we know
scan the array each time to find the minimum
values, remember that the minimum of values
keep changing, I cannot sort it once in for
all. Because, each time I combine two letters,
I introduce a new letter into my array with
a new minimum value which was not there before
and not a new value, which may not there before
it is may or may not be the minimum.
So, each state I have to find the minimum,
so it is an order k scan each time, so linear
scan and I do this about k these times. So,
I get order k square, but it should be fairly
cleared into see that this bottle neck can
be got around by using a heap, where there
is precise what heaps are good at finding
the minimum.
So, if I maintain the frequencies not as a
simple list or array, but as a heap, then
in order log k time, I can find the minimum
values and then I can insert back the new
composite letter also into heap in to log
k time. So, each iteration takes some log
k, and so I improve from k square to k log
k.
So, recall that, we mentioned in the beginning
that this is going to be a last greedy algorithm.
So, why is this greedy, well because every
time, we make a recursive call, we are deciding
to combine two nodes into one and the two
letters we are choose always once with the
lowest frequencies. Now, what is to say, that
we could not do better by choosing the lowest
then the third rows per, but we now a try,
we only try to lowest to the second rows.
So, we make a locally optimal choice and we
keep going with choice, never going back to
re-visit it, and finally we get a global solution.
Now, we have to prove that this global solution
is actually optimal and we have to do that,
because there is no other reason is expect
that by making a short sited choice, at the
current time take the two worst frequencies
and combine them, that you are always going
to get the best solution. So, this is very
much a greedy stunt.
So, finally a brief historical note, so Clot
Shannon is the father of information theory
and when, we are looking at these problems
around 1950 or, so they were faced with this
problem are finding an efficient encoding.
So, Shannon and Fano, proposed the divide
and conquer thing, so what us it was let us
look at the encoding of the alphabet. So,
some of them are going to start with 0, some
other going to start with 1.
Everything which is in the left sub tree of
this coding tree that we construct is going
to have a code of the form 0 something, something,
everything on the right is going to have something
at the from 1 something, something. So, it
seem intuitive to them, that divide and conquer
strategy is good, what you can put letters
on this side, such that the occupied roughly
of the frequency weight of the total alphabet.
That is a frequencies of all the letters,
who's encoding start with 0, their frequencies
added to roughly half and the other one also
to half.
So, split the alphabet in the two of equal
weight assign some of them to start with 0Õs,
the other to start with 1, then I recursive
it is solve this. So, a partition is A 1,
A 2, sums of the frequencies in each other
sets are roughly equal, solve them recursively.
Unfortunately, this is not guaranteed to generate
an optimal encoding, you can come up with
examples, where you can do this and then end
of the something which you can improve by
doing some other thing.
So, it turned out the Huffman was a graduates
student in a course of Fano, he heard about
this problem and we thought about it, and
after a few years he came up with this clever
algorithm which we have done today.